Add AutoTLS client spec (#1)
vacp2p/specs: tls/autotls.md

# libp2p AutoTLS  <!-- omit in toc -->

| Lifecycle Stage | Maturity       | Status | Latest Revision |
|-----------------|----------------|--------|-----------------|

> | ??              | ?????????????? | Active | r0, 2025-04-30  |

Reviewer: Need real values (following spec lifecycle recommendations). Probably something like 1A?  (working draft / active)

Authors: [@gmelodie]

> Interest Group: [@??], [@???]

Reviewer: Probably better to replace this by TBD

[@gmelodie]: https://github.com/gmelodie
[@??]: https://github.com/Stebalien

> [@???]: https://github.com/jacobheun

Reviewer: @??, @???

See the [lifecycle document][lifecycle-spec] for context about the maturity level
and spec status.

[lifecycle-spec]: https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/00-framework-01-spec-lifecycle.md

## Table of Contents  <!-- omit in toc -->

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [General Flow](#general-flow)

## Introduction

> TODO

Reviewer: Missing section. Focus on why this exist

> ## General Flow

Reviewer: 1- Any security consideration? Would it be possible for two nodes to request certs for same peerId? is hijacking possible?
2 - Should it be mentioned somewhere how are peers validated using this cert? would it make sense to add that?
3 - Would it make sense to have specs for error cases / retries as well as certificate expiration?

Author: I didn't create the protocol, so I can only speculate. Should I add this anyways? If so, do I put these in the introduction section or do I create another section?

Reviewer: I'd say we should only add these details if you have an accurate response to these questions, and not speculation. Perhaps these questions can then become an Issue in the repo later? wdyt.

Author: Agreed! I think one of the issues of a spec not being present is that these issues are not (at least publicly) discussed.

> ## General Flow

Reviewer: Also across the document i see the usage of “should”, “can”, “is”. Should we use modal verbs from https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119?

Reviewer: There's also some usage of "we", "you". Should the spec try to be impersonal instead? (tbf, some other specs do use these words

> 1. Start libp2p client with public IPv4 (or IPv6) and support for `identify` protocol (standard for `nim-libp2p`)

Reviewer: client or node?
```suggestion
1. Start libp2p node with public IPv4 (or IPv6) and support for `identify` protocol (standard for `nim-libp2p`)
```

> 1. Start libp2p client with public IPv4 (or IPv6) and support for `identify` protocol (standard for `nim-libp2p`)

Reviewer: Add a link to identify protocol spec in `identify`

2. Get `PeerID` as a base36 of the CID of the multihash with the `libp2p-key` (`0x72`) multicodec: 
	1. Transform PeerID into a multihash `mh`

> 	2. Transform `mh` into a `v1` CID with the `0x72` multicodec (`libp2p-key`)

Reviewer: Maybe using wording similar to https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/peer-ids/peer-ids.md#string-representation
```suggestion
	2. Encode `mh` using [CIDv1](https://github.com/multiformats/cid?tab=readme-ov-file#cidv1) with the `libp2p-key` [multicodec](https://github.com/multiformats/multicodec)(`0x72`)
```

> 	3. Base36 encode the `cid.data.buffer` (not regular base36! this one needs [multibase base36](https://github.com/multiformats/multibase/blob/f378d3427fe125057facdbac936c4215cc777920/rfcs/Base36.md), which is the same as regular base36 but doesn't trims leading zeroes and starts with a `k` or `K`) to get `b36peerid`

Reviewer: Step 1-3 are somewhat confusing to follow. What do you think of adding an example?

> 	3. Base36 encode the `cid.data.buffer` (not regular base36! this one needs [multibase base36](https://github.com/multiformats/multibase/blob/f378d3427fe125057facdbac936c4215cc777920/rfcs/Base36.md), which is the same as regular base36 but doesn't trims leading zeroes and starts with a `k` or `K`) to get `b36peerid`

Reviewer: Where is this `cid.data.buffer` coming from? is this nim-code?

3. Generate an RSA key `mykey`

> 4. Register an account on the ACME server ([production server for Let's Encrypt](https://acme-v02.api.letsencrypt.org) or just the [staging server](https://acme-staging-v02.api.letsencrypt.org) for testing)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Register an account on the ACME server ([production server for Let's Encrypt](https://acme-v02.api.letsencrypt.org) or on the [staging server](https://acme-staging-v02.api.letsencrypt.org) for testing)
```

	1. Send a GET request to the `directory` endpoint, and extract the `newAccount` value from the JSON response, which will be the registration URL we'll use

> 	2. Signed POST request to registration URL with the following `payload`: `{"termsOfServiceAgreed": true}`. The actual POST body is signed using JWT with an `mykey` and `nonce` (gotten from `directory["newNonce"]`), so the final body of any ACME request should look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	2. Signed POST request to registration URL with the following `payload`: `{"termsOfServiceAgreed": true}`. The actual POST body is signed using [JWT](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7519) with the RSA key `mykey` and `nonce` (obtained from `directory["newNonce"]`). The final body of any ACME request should look like:
```
Also, consider extracting the payload to a code block ```

		```json
		{
		  "payload": token.claims.toBase64,
		  "protected": token.header.toBase64,
		  "signature": base64UrlEncode(token.signature),
		}
		```

> 		Obs: the response to the account registration contains a `kid` in the `location` field that should be saved and used in following requests to ACME server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
		**Note:** The response to the account registration contains a `kid` in the `location` field that should be saved and used in following requests to ACME server
```

5. Request a certificate for the `*.{b36peerid}.libp2p.direct` domain from the ACME server by issuing a POST request using the same JWT signature scheme (and another new `nonce` from `directory["newNonce"]`) but with `kid` instead of `jwk` field and the following payload:
	```json
	{
		"type": "dns",
		"value": "*.{b36peerid}.libp2p.direct"
	}
	```
6. From the ACME server response, get the entry with `"type"` of `"dns-01"` and derive the `Key Authorization` for it: 
	-  `sha256.digest((dns01Challenge["token"] + "." + thumbprint(key))` 
		-  [JWK thumbprint](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7638): `base64encode(sha256.digest({"e": key.e, "kty": "RSA", "n": key.n}))`, but you can use other key types too
7. Send challenge to AutoTLS broker/server https://registration.libp2p.direct/, which requires a [PeerID Auth](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/http/peer-id-auth.md) scheme:
	1. Send GET request to the `v1/_acme-challenge` endpoint and get `www-authenticate` field from the response header, and extract the values of three strings that it contains: `challenge-client`, `public-key` and `opaque`

> 	2. Generate random string with around 42 characters as a `challengeServer` of our own

Reviewer: Why 42? is there a guideline why 42 characters is necessary? or should we say something like having sufficient entropy and number of expected bits of entropy?

Author: Updated to 32 as per the [go-libp2p impl](https://github.com/libp2p/go-libp2p/blob/455a983b0ea55b4f14d6e065cc7bf482c1818f56/p2p/http/auth/internal/handshake/handshake.go#L21) but there's nothing in the [peerid auth spec](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/http/peer-id-auth.md) about the length

	3. Get `peer-pubkey` and `peer-privkey` keys of our libp2p `peer`, which are not necessarily the same keys we're using to talk to ACME server

> 	4. `sig = ` (obs: `varint` is a protobuf [varint](https://protobuf.dev/programming-guides/encoding/#varints) field that encodes the length of the `key=value` string)

Reviewer: This observation should likely go after point 4. Also, consider using "note:" instead of "obs:"

	```
		sig = base64URL(
			peer-privkey.sign(
				bytes(varint + "challenge-client={challenge-client}") +
				bytes(varint + "hostname={hostname}") +
				bytes(varint + "server-public-key={publicKey}")
			)
		)
	```
	5. `headers	 =`
		```json
		{
			"Content-Type": "application/json",
			"User-Agent": "nim-libp2p",
			"authorization": "libp2p-PeerID public-key=\"{clientPublicKeyB64}\", opaque=\"{opaque}\", challenge-server=\"{challengeServer}\", sig=\"{sig}\""
		}
		```

> 	6. Send POST to `v1/_acme-challenge` endpoint using `payload` as body and `headers`

Reviewer: > using `payload` as body and `headers`.

What is to be done with `headers`? I find the text a bit ambiguous. Maybe something like this instead?
> Send a POST request to the `v1/_acme-challenge` endpoint, using the `payload` as the request body and headers as the HTTP headers.

	7. Get the `bearer` token from the `authentication-info` header of the response, which should be used for following requests from this client.

> 8. Check that the AutoTLS server has added the `_acme-challenge.{b36peerid}.libp2p.direct` `TXT` and the `dashed-public-ip-address.{b36peerid}.libp2p.direct` `A` DNS resource records.

Reviewer: What does `Check` mean in this context? I wonder if it wouldnt be better to indicate that you need to do a dns query or something

> 9. Notify ACME server of challenge completion so it can lookup the DNS resource records.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
9. Notify ACME server of challenge completion, so it can lookup the DNS resource records.
```

	1. Get URL from `dns01challenge["url"]`
	2. Send an empty signed JSON payload (`{}`) to the ACME server using the `kid` obtained from the ACME registration step and get the response from the server (`completedResponse`).

> 	3. From `completedResponse`,  the `url` field from the JSON body by `GET`ting it, again with `kid` signing.

Reviewer: Between `completedResponse`, and `, the url`, is it missing a word or something? I find unclear what step 3 is about. 
Also consider replacing the phrase `by GETting it, again with 'kid'` by `by sending a GET request to the url using the same 'kid'`.

> 10. Wait for ACME server to finish testing the domain.

Reviewer: This seems imprecise. Maybe instead of using `Wait for`, it should be something that indicates that you have to poll the acme server periodically until it finishes validating the challenge

	- The response from the polling will contain a `status` field that will be `pending` while ACME is still testing the challenge, and `valid` or `invalid` when it's done.

> 11. Download certificate from ACME server.

Reviewer: Might be a good idea to add a `## References` section wiht a link to auto tls blog post and resources used when implementing autotls

> 11. Download certificate from ACME server.

Reviewer: How do you download the certificate?
